of cbs news the questions are mine and
i have not shared them with the
candidates or their aides the audience
is taken a vow of silence no applause no
reaction of any kind except right now
when we welcome president barack obama
and governor mitt romney
gentlemen your campaigns have agreed to
certain rules and they are simple
they've asked me to divide the evening
into segments i'll pose a question at
the beginning of each segment you will
each have two minutes to respond and
then we will have a general discussion
until we move to the next segment the
nice debate as both of you know comes on
the fiftieth anniversary of the night
that president kennedy told the world
that the soviet union had installed
nuclear missiles in cuba perhaps the
closest we've ever come to this nuclear
war and it is a sobering reminder that
every president faces at some point an
unexpected threat to our national
security from abroad so let's begin the
first segment is the challenge of a
changing middle east and the new face of
terrorism i'm going to put this into two
segments so you'll have two topic
questions within this one segment on
that subject the first question and it
concerns libya the controversy over what
happened there continues four americans
are dead including an american
ambassador questions remain what
happened what caused it was it
was it an intelligence failure was it a
policy failure was there an attempt to
mislead people about what really
happened governor romney you said this
was an example of an american policy in
the middle east that is unraveling
before our very eyes
i'd like to hear each of you give your
thoughts on that governor romney you won
the toss you go first thank you bob and
thank you for agreeing to moderate this
debate this evening thank you to lynn
university for welcoming us here and mr
president is good to be with you again
we were together at a humorous event a
little earlier and it's nice to maybe be
funny this time not on purpose we'll see
what happens this is obviously an area
of great concern to the entire world and
to america in particular which is to see
a complete change and the the structure
and the
the environment in the middle east with
the arab spring came a great deal of
hope that there would be a change
towards more moderation an opportunity
for greater participation on the part of
women in public life and in economic
life in the middle east but instead
we've seen in nation after nation a
number of disturbing events of course we
see in syria 30,000 civilians having
been killed by the military there we see
in in libya an attack apparently by i
think we know now by terrorists of some
kind against against our people
therefore people dead our hearts and
minds go to them mali has been taken
over the northern part of mali by
al-qaeda type individuals we have in
egypt a muslim brotherhood president and
so what we're seeing is a pretty
dramatic reversal in the kind of hopes
we had for that region of course the
greatest threat of all is iran for years
closer to a nuclear weapon and and we're
gonna have to recognize that we have to
do as the president's done i i
congratulate him on i'm taking out osama
bin laden and going after the leadership
in al qaeda but we can't kill our way
out of this mess
we're gonna have to put in place a very
comprehensive and robust strategy to
help the the world of islam and other
parts of the world reject this radical
violent extremism which is it's
certainly not on the run it's really not
hiding that this is a group that is now
involved in 10 or 12 countries and it
presents an enormous threat to our
friends to the world to america
long-term and we must have a
comprehensive strategy to help reject
this kind of extremism mr president
well my first job as commander-in-chief
bob is to keep the american people safe
and that's what we've done over the last
four years we ended the war in iraq
refocused our attention on those who
actually killed us on 9/11 and as a
consequence al qaeda's core leadership
has been decimated in addition we're now
able to transition out of afghanistan in
a responsible way making sure that
afghans take responsibility for their
own security and that allows us also
to rebuild alliances and make friends
around the world to combat future
threats now with respect to libya as i
indicated in the last debate when we
received that phone call i immediately
made sure that number one we did
everything we could to secure those
americans who were still in harm's way
number two that we would investigate
exactly what happened and number three
most importantly that we would go after
those who killed americans and we would
bring them to justice and that's exactly
what we're gonna do but i think it's
important to step back and think about
what happened in libya and keep in mind
that i and americans took leadership in
organizing an international coalition it
made sure that we were able to without
putting troops on the ground at the cost
of less than what we spent in two weeks
in iraq liberate a country that had been
under the yoke of dictatorship for 40
years got rid of a despot who had killed
americans and as a consequence despite
this tragedy you had tens of thousands
of libyans after the events in benghazi
marching and saying america is our
friend we stand with them now that
represents the opportunity we have to
take advantage of them and governor
romney i'm glad that you agree that we
have been successful in going after al
qaeda but i have to tell you that you
know your strategy previously has been
one that has been all over the map and
is not designed to keep americans safe
or to build on the opportunities that
exist in the middle east well my
strategy is pretty straightforward which
is to go after the bad guys to make sure
we do our very best to interrupt them to
kill them to take them out of the
picture but my strategy is broader than
that that's that's important of course
but the key that we're going to have to
pursue is a pathway to to get the muslim
world to be able to reject extremism on
its own we don't want another iraq we
don't want another afghanistan that's
not the right course for us the right
course for us is to make sure that we go
after the the people who are leaders of
these various anti-american groups and
these these jihad
but also help the muslim world and how
do we do that the group of arab scholars
came together organized by the un to
look at how we can help the the world
reject these these terrorists and the
answer that they came up with was this
one more economic development we should
keep our foreign aid our direct foreign
investment and that of our friends we
should coordinate it to make sure that
we we push back and give them more
economic development number to better
education number three gender equality
number four the rule of law we have to
help these nations create civil
societies but what's been happening over
the last couple of years is as we've
watched this tumult in the middle east
this rising tide of chaos occur you see
al qaeda rushing in you see other
jihadist groups rushing in and and
they're throughout many nations in the
middle east it's wonderful that libya
seems to be making some progress despite
this terrible tragedy but next door of
course we have egypt libya six million
population egypt 80 million population
we want we want to make sure that we're
seeing progress throughout the middle
east with mali now having north mali
taken over by al qaeda with syria having
assad continuing to assess it killed
murder his own people this is a region
in tumult and of course iran let's say
on the path to a nuclear weapon we've
got real games in latin but let's give
the president a chance
governor romney i'm glad that you
recognize that al qaeda is a threat
because a few months ago when you were
asked what's the biggest geopolitical
threat facing america you said russia
not al qaeda
he said russia and the 1980s are now
calling to ask for their foreign policy
back because you know the cold war has
been over for 20 years but governor yeah
when it comes to our foreign policy you
seem to want to import the foreign
policies in the 1980s just like the
social policies of the 1950s and the
economic policies in the 1920s you say
that you're not interested in
duplicating what happened in iraq but
just a few weeks ago you said you think
we should have more troops in iraq right
now and the the the challenge we have i
know you haven't been a position to
actually execute foreign policy but
every time you've offered an opinion
you've been wrong you said we should
have gone into iraq
despite the fact that there were no
weapons of mass destruction you said
that we should still have troops in iraq
to this day you indicated that we
shouldn't be passing nuclear treaties
with russia despite the fact that 71
senators democrats and republicans voted
for it you've said that first we should
not have a timeline in afghanistan then
you said we should now you say maybe
or it depends which means not only were
you wrong but you're also confusing and
sending mixed messages both to our
troops and our allies so what what we
need to do with respect to the middle
east is strong steady leadership not
wrong and reckless leadership that is
all over the map and unfortunately
that's the kind of opinions that you've
offered throughout this campaign and it
is not a recipe for american strength or
keeping america safe over the holiday
and a couple of segments a chair to give
you a chance to respond well of course i
don't concur with what the president
said about my own record and the things
that i've said they don't happen to be
accurate but but i can't say this that
we're talking about the middle east and
how to help the middle east reject the
kind of terrorism we're seeing and the
rising tide of tumult and confusion and
an attacking me is not agenda attacking
me is not talking about how we're going
to deal with the challenges that exist
in the middle east and take advantage of
the opportunity there and stem the tide
of this violence but i'll respond to a
couple of things you mentioned first of
all russia i indicated is a geopolitical
no one excuse me it's a geopolitical foe
and i said in the same in the same
paragraph i said and iran is the
greatest national security threat we
face russia does continue to battle us
in the un time and time again i have
clear eyes on this i'm not going to wear
rose-colored glasses when it comes to
russia or mr putin and i'm certainly
not going to say to him i'll give you
more flexibility at the election after
the election he'll get more backbone
number two with regards to iraq you and
i agreed i believe that there should
have been a status of forces agreement
the general oh you didn't you didn't
want to status of well what i what i
would not have done is left 10,000
troops in
rock that would tie us down and that
certainly would not help us in the
middle east i'm sorry you actually there
was a there was an effort in the part of
the president to have a status of forces
degrees and i could occurred in that and
said that we should have some number of
troops that stayed on that was something
i concurred with your posture that was
my posture as well yeah i thought it
should have been 5,000 troops i thought
i should've been more troops but you
don't this is begun whatsoever this is
just a few weeks ago that you indicated
that we should still have troops in iraq
no i doubt that sorry that's it i've
indicated that you failed to put in
place a status of forces agreement at
the end of the conflict that is just so
here's one getting up here's one here's
one thing i've learned as
commander-in-chief you've got to be
clear both to our allies and our enemies
about where you stand and what you mean
now you just gave a speech a few weeks
ago in which you said we should still
have troops in iraq that is not a recipe
for making sure that we are taking
advantage of the opportunities and
meeting the challenges the middle east
now it is absolutely true that we cannot
just meet these challenges militarily
and so what i've done throughout my
presidency and will continue to do is
number one make sure that these
countries are supporting our
counterterrorism efforts number two make
sure that they are standing by our
interests in israel's security because
it is a true friend and our greatest
ally in the region number three we do
have to make sure that we're protecting
religious minorities and women because
these countries can't develop unless all
the population not just half of it is
developing number four we do have to
develop their economic their economic
capabilities but number five the other
thing that we have to do is recognize
that we can't continue to do
nation-building in these regions part of
american leadership is making sure that
we're doing nation-building here at home
that will help us maintain the kind of
american leadership that we need let me
interject the second topic question in
this segment about the middle east and
so on and that is you both mentioned
alluded to this and that is syria war in
syria is now spilled over into lebanon
we have what more than a hundred people
that were killed
there and a bomb there were
demonstrations there eight people dead
mr president it's been more than a year
since you saw you told us sod he had to
go since then 30,000 syrians have died
we've had 300 thousand refugees the war
goes on he's still there
should we reassess our policy and see if
we can find a better way to influence
events there or is that even possible
and did you you go first sir what we've
done is organize the international
community saying assad has to go
we've mobilized sanctions against that
government we have made sure that they
are isolated we have provided
humanitarian assistance and we are
helping the opposition organize and
we're particularly interested in making
sure that we're mobilizing the moderate
forces inside of syria but ultimately
syrians are going to have to determine
their own future and so everything we're
doing we're doing in consultation with
our partners in the region including
israel which obviously has a huge
interest in seeing what happens in syria
coordinating with turkey and other
countries in the region that have a
great interest in this now this what
we're seeing taking place in syria is
heartbreaking and that's why we are
going to do everything we can to make
sure that we are helping the opposition
but we also have to recognize that you
know for us to get more entangled
militarily in syria is a serious step
and we have to do so making absolutely
certain that we know who we are helping
that we're not putting arms in the hands
of folks who eventually could turn them
against us or allies in the region and i
am confident that assad's days are
but what we can't do is to simply
suggest that as governor romney at times
has suggested that giving heavy weapons
for example to the syrian opposition is
a simple proposition that would lead us
to be safer over the long term governor
well let's step back and talk about
what's happening in syria and how
important is first of all 30,000 people
being killed by their government is a
humanitarian disaster secondly syria is
an opportunity for us
as syria plays an important role in
middle east particularly right now syria
is iran's only ally in the arab world
it's their route to the sea it's the
route for them to arm hezbollah in
lebanon which threatens of course our
ally israel and so seeing syria remove
assad is a very high priority for us
number two singing a the replacement
government being responsible people is
critical for us and finally we don't
want to have military involvement there
we don't want to get drawn into a
military conflict and so the right
course for us is working through our
partners and with our own resources to
identify responsible parties within
syria organize them bring them together
in a in a form of not if not government
a form of council that can take the lead
in syria and then make sure they have
the arms necessary to defend themselves
we do need to make sure that they don't
have arms that get into the the wrong
hands as those arms could be used to
hurt us down the road we need to make
sure as well that we coordinate this
effort with our allies and particularly
with with israel but the saudis and the
qatari and and and the turks are all
very concerned about this they're
willing to work with us we need to have
a very effective leadership effort in
syria making sure that the the
insurgents there are armed and that the
insurgents that become armed are people
who will be the responsible parties
recognize i believe that assad must go i
believe he will go but i believe we want
to make sure that we have the
relationships of friendship with the
people that take his place such that in
the years to come we see syria as a as a
friend and syria as a responsible party
in the middle east this this is a
critical opportunity for america and
what i'm afraid of is that we've watched
over the past year or so first the
president saying what we'll let the un
deal with it and assad excuse me a kofi
annan came in and said we're going to
try and have a ceasefire that didn't
work then it looked to the russians and
said let's see if you can do something
we should be playing the leadership role
they're not on the ground with military
all right by the leadership role we are
playing leadership role we organized the
friends of syria we are mobilizing
humanitarian support and support for the
opposition and we are making sure that
those we help
those who will be friends of ours in the
long-term and friends of our allies in
the region over the long-term but you
know going back to libya because this is
an example of how we make choices you
know when we went into libya and we were
able to immediately stop the massacre
there because of the unique
circumstances and a coalition that we
had helped to organize we also had to
make sure that mom or gadhafi didn't
stay there and to the governor's credit
you supported us going into libya and
the coalition that we organized but when
it came time to making sure that gadhafi
did not stay in power that he was
captured governor your suggestion was
that this was mission creep that this
was mission muddled imagine if we had
pulled out at that point
muammar gaddafi had more american blood
on his hands than any individual other
osama bin laden and so we were going to
make sure that we finished the job
that's part of the reason why the
libyans stand with us but we did so in a
careful thoughtful way making certain
that we knew who we were dealing with
that those forces of moderation on the
ground were ones that we could work with
and we have to take the same kind of
steady thoughtful leadership when it
comes to syria that's exactly what we're
governor can i just ask you would you go
beyond what the administration would do
like for example would you put in no-fly
zones over syria i don't i don't to have
our military involved in syria i don't
think there's a necessity to put our
military in syria at this stage i don't
anticipate that in the future as i
indicated our objectives are to replace
assad and to have in place a new
government which is friendly to us a
responsible government if possible and i
want to make sure they get armed and
they have the arms necessary to defend
themselves but also to remove to remove
assad but i do not want to see a
military involvement on the part of our
of our troops well and this this isn't
this isn't going to be necessary we have
with our partners in the region we have
sufficient resources to support those
groups but look that's been going on for
a year there's a time this should have
been a time for american leadership we
should have take
in a leading role not militarily but a
leading role organizationally
governmentally to bring together the
parties there to find responsible
parties as you hear from intelligence
sources even today the the the the
insurgents are highly disparate they
haven't come together they haven't
formed a unity group a council of some
kind and that needs to happen american
can help that happen and we need to make
sure they have the arms they need to
carry out the the very important role
which is getting rid of assad so we get
a quick response to this law because i
want to i'll be very quick what you just
heard governor romney said is he doesn't
have different ideas and that's because
we're doing exactly what we should be
doing to try to promote a moderate
syrian leadership and a an effective
transition so that we get assad out
that's the kind of leadership we've
shown that's the kind of leadership will
continue to show may i ask you you know
during the egyptian turmoil there came a
point when you said it was time for
president mubarak to go some in your
administration thought perhaps we should
have waited a while on that do you have
any regrets about that no i don't
because i think that america has to
stand with democracy the notion that we
would have tanks run over those young
people who were in tahrir square that is
not the kind of american leadership that
john f kennedy talked about 50 years ago
but what i've also said is that now that
you have a democratically elected
government in egypt that they have to
make sure that they take responsibility
for protecting religious minorities and
we have put significant pressure on them
to make sure they're doing that to
recognize the rights of women which is
critical throughout the region these
countries can't develop if young women
are not given the kind of education that
they need they have to abide by their
treaty with israel that is a red line
for us because not only is israel's
security at stake but our security is at
stake if that unravels they have to make
sure that they're cooperating with us
when it comes to counterterrorism and we
will help them with respect to
developing their own economy because
what's going to make the egyptian
revolution successful for the people of
egypt but also for the world is if those
young people who gather there are seeing
opportunities their aspirations are
similar to young people's here they want
jobs they want to be able to make sure
their kids are going to a good school
they want to make sure that they have a
roof over their heads and that they have
the prospects of a better life in the
future and so one of the things that
we've been doing is for example
organizing entrepreneurship conferences
with these egyptians to give them a
sense of how they can start rebuilding
their economy in a way that's non
corrupt that's transparent but what is
also important for us to understand is
is that for america to be successful in
this region there's some things that
we're going to have to do here at home
as well you know one of the challenges
over the last decade as we've done
experiments in nation building and
places like iraq and afghanistan and
we've neglected for example developing
our own economy our own energy sectors
all in education system and it's very
hard for us to project leadership around
the world when we're not doing what we
need to cover nur romney yeah i want to
hear your response to that but i would
just ask you would you were stuck with
mubarak i know i believe as the
president indicated and said at the time
that i supported his his action there i
felt that i wish we'd have had a better
vision of the future i wish that looking
back at the beginning of the president's
term and even further back than that
that we'd have recognized that there was
a growing energy and passion for freedom
in that part of the world and that we
would have worked more aggressively with
our our friend with other friends in the
region to have them make the transition
towards a more representative form of
government such that it didn't explode
in the way it did but but once it
exploded i felt the same as the
president did which is these these
freedom voices and the the streets of
egypt for the people who were were
speaking of our principals and the
president mubarak had done things which
were unimaginable and the and the idea
of him crushing his people was not
something that we could possibly support
let me let me step back and talk about
what i think our mission has to be in
the middle east and even more broadly
because our purpose is to make sure the
world is more peaceful we want a
planet we want people to be able to
enjoy their lives and know they're gonna
have a bright and prosperous future and
not be at war that's our purpose and the
mantle of leadership for the promoting
the principles of the pieces for america
we didn't ask for it but it's an honor
that we have it but for us to be able to
promote those principles of peace
requires us to be strong and that begins
with a strong economy here at home and
unfortunately the economy is not
stronger when that one that the
president of iraq excuse me of iran
ahmadinejad says that our debt makes us
not a great country that's a frightening
thing the former chief of staff of the
joint chiefs of staff said that admiral
mullen said that our debt is the biggest
national security threat we face this is
it we have weakened our economy we need
a strong economy we need to have as well
a strong military our military second to
none of the world we're blessed with
terrific soldiers and extraordinary
technology and intelligence but the idea
of a trillion dollars in cuts through
sequestration and budget cuts to the
military would change that we need to
have strong allies our association and
connection with our allies is essential
to america's strength whether the great
nation that has allies 42 allies and
friends around the world and finally we
have to stand by our principles and if
we're strong in each of those things
american influence will grow but
unfortunately in nowhere in the world is
america's influence greater today than
it was four years ago all right and
that's because we bigger these are this
florida murphy you're going to get a
chance to respond to that because that's
a perfect segue into our next segment
and that is what is america's role in
the world and that is the question what
do each of you see is our role in the
world and i believe governor romney it's
your turn to go first well i absolutely
believe that america has a
responsibility and the privilege of
helping defend freedom and promote the
principles that that make the world more
peaceful and those principles include
human rights human dignity free
enterprise freedom of expression
elections because when there are
elections people tend to vote for peace
they don't vote for war so we want to
promote those principles around
the world we recognize that there are
places of conflict in the world we want
to end those conflicts to the extent
humanly possible but in order to be able
to fulfill our role in the world america
must be strong america must lead and for
that to happen we have to strengthen our
economy here at home you can't have 23
million people struggling to get a job
you can't have an economy that over the
last three years keeps slowing down its
growth rate you can't have kids coming
out of college half of whom can't find a
job today or a job that's commensurate
with their college degree we have to get
our economy going and our military we've
got to strengthen our military long term
we don't know what the world is going to
throw at us down the road we make
decisions today in a military that will
confront challenges we can't imagine in
the 2000 debates there was no mention of
terrorism for instance and year later
9/11 happened so we have to make
decisions based upon uncertainty and
that means a strong military i will not
cut a military budget we have to also
stand by our allies i think the tension
that existed between israel in the
united states was very unfortunate i
think also that pulling our missile
defense program out of poland and the
way we did was also unfortunate in terms
of if you will disrupting that the
relationship in some ways that existed
between us and then of course with
regards to standing for our principles
when when the students took to the
streets in tehran and the people there
protested the green revolution occurred
for the president to be silent i thought
was an enormous mistake we have to stand
for our principles stand for our allies
stand for a strong military and stand
for a stronger economy mr president
america remains the one indispensable
nation and the world needs a strong
america and it is stronger now than when
i came into office because we ended the
war in iraq we were able to refocus our
attention on not only the terrorist
threat but also beginning a transition
process in afghanistan it also allowed
us to refocus on alliances relationships
that had been neglected for a decade and
governor romney our alliances have never
been stronger
in asia in europe in africa with israel
where we have unprecedented military and
intelligence cooperation including
dealing with the iranian threat but what
we also haven't been able to do is
position ourselves so we can start
rebuilding america
and that's what my plan does making sure
that we're bringing manufacturing back
to our shores so that we're creating
jobs here as we've done with the auto
industry not rewarding companies that
are shipping jobs overseas making sure
that we've got the best education system
in the world including retraining our
workers for the jobs of tomorrow doing
everything we can to control our own
energy we've cut our oil imports to the
lowest level in two decades because
we've developed oil and natural gas but
we also have to develop clean energy
technologies that will allow us to cut
our exports in half by 2020 that's the
kind of leadership that we need to show
and we've got to make sure that we
reduce our deficit unfortunately
governor romney's plan doesn't do it
we've got to do in a responsible way by
cutting out spending we don't need but
also by asking the wealthiest to pay a
little bit more that way we can invest
in the research and technology that's
always kept us at the cutting edge now
governor romney has taken a different
approach throughout this campaign
both at home and abroad he has proposed
wrong and reckless policies now he's
praised george bush as a good economic
stewart and dick cheney as somebody
who's shows great wisdom and judgment
and taking us back to those kinds of
strategies that got us into this mess
are not the way that we are going to
maintain leadership in 21st century
governor romney wrong in reckless
policies i've got a policy for the
future and agenda for the future and
when it comes to our economy here at
home i know what it takes to create 12
million new jobs and rising take-home
pay and what we've seen over the last
four years is something i don't want to
see over the next four years the
president said by now we'd be at five
point four percent unemployment
we're nine million jobs short of that i
will get america working again and see
rising take-home pay again i'll do it
with five simple steps number one we are
have north american energy independence
we're going to do it by taking full
advantage of oil coal gas nuclear and
our renewables number two we're going to
increase our trade trade and grows about
12 per year and doubles about every
every five or so years we can do better
than that
particularly in latin america the
opportunities for us in latin america we
have just not taken advantage of fully
it's a matter of fact latin america's
economy is almost as big as the economy
of china we're all focused on china
latin america is a huge opportunity for
us time zone language opportunities
number three we're going to have to have
training programs that work for our
workers and schools that finally put the
parents and the teachers and the kids
first and the teachers unions gonna have
to go behind and then we're gonna have
to get to a balanced budget we can't
expect entrepreneurs and businesses
large and small to take their life
savings or their company's money and
invest in america if they think we're
headed to the road degrees and that's
what we're going right now unless we
finally get off the spending and
borrowing bench and i'll get us on track
to a balanced budget and finally number
five we've got to champion small
business small businesses we're smile
where jobs come from two-thirds of our
jobs come from small businesses new
business formation is down to the lowest
level in 30 years under this
administration i want to bring it back
and get back good jobs and rising
take-home pay well let's talk about what
we need to compete
first of all governor romney talks about
small businesses but governor when you
were in massachusetts small businesses
development ranked about 48 i think out
of 50 states in massachusetts because
the policies that you're promoting
actually don't help small businesses and
the way you define small businesses
include folks at the very top and they
include you and me
that's not the kind of small business
promotion we need but but let's take an
example that we know is going to make a
difference the 21st century and that's
our education policy we didn't have a
lot of chance to talk about this in the
last debate now under my leadership what
we've done is reformed education working
with governor's 46 states we've seen
progress and gains in schools that were
having a terrible time and they're
starting to finally make progress
and what i want to do is to hire more
teachers especially in math and science
because we know that we've fallen behind
when it comes to math and science and
those teachers can make a difference now
governor romney when you were asked by
teachers whether or not this would help
the economy grow you said this isn't
gonna help the economy grow when you
were asked about reduced class sizes you
said class sizes don't make a difference
but i tell you if you talk to teachers
they will tell you it does make a
difference and if we've got math
teachers who are able to provide the
kind of support that they need for our
kids that's what's going to determine
whether or not the new businesses are
created here companies are going to
locate here depending on whether we've
got the most highly-skilled workforce
and the kinds of budget proposals that
you've put forward when we don't ask
either you or me to pay a dime more in
terms of reducing the deficit but
instead we slash support for education
that's undermining our long-term
competitiveness that is not good for
america's position in the world and the
world notices let me get back to farm
policy i just get back well i i did this
big a moment okay to let me do bob just
about education because i i'm so proud
of the state that i had the chance to be
governor of we have every two years
tests that look at how well our kids are
doing fourth graders and eighth graders
are tested in english and math while i
was governor i was proud that our fourth
graders came out number one of all 50
states in english and then also in math
and her eighth graders number one in
english and also in math first time one
state had been number one in all four
measures how do we do that well
republicans and democrats came together
on a bipartisan basis to put in place
education principles that focused on
having great teachers in the classroom
that was a that was what allowed us to
become the number one state in the
nation but that was ten days before you
took office and we've done absolutely
and then you cut it the first spending
when the fors office first and we kept
our schools number one the nation
there's still number one today all right
and the principles that we put in place
we also gave kids not just a graduation
exam that determine whether they were up
to the skills needed to be able to
compete but also if they graduated in
the top quarter of their class they got
a four year tuition free
at any message is its public institution
of higher ed happened before you came
into office that was actually mine
actually mr president your honor i want
to try to shift it because we have heard
some of this in the other debates
governor you say you want a bigger
military you want a bigger navy you
don't want to cut defense spending what
i want to ask you we're talking about
financial problems in this country where
are you gonna get the money well let's
let's come back and talk about the
military but all the way all the way
through first of all i'm going through
from the very beginning we're gonna cut
about 5 of the discretionary budget
excluding military that's number one
what's alright and that's without
driving a goodie the good news is out
you'd be happy to have you take a look
come on our website you'll look at how
we get to a balanced budget within eight
to ten years we do it by getting by
reducing spending and a whole series of
programs by the way number one i get rid
of is obamacare there are a number of
things that sound good but frankly we
just can't afford them and that one
doesn't sound good and it's not
affordable so i get rid of that one from
day one to the extent humanly possible
we get that out we take program after
program that we don't absolutely have to
have and we can get rid of them
number two we take some programs that we
are going to keep like medicaid which is
a program for the poor where take that
health care program for the poor and we
give it to the states to run because
states run these programs more
efficiently as a governor i thought
please give me this program can i do
that i can run this more efficiently
than the federal government and states
by the way are proving it states like
arizona rhode island have taken these
these medicaid dollars have shown they
can run these programs more
cost-effectively and so i want to do
those two things it gets us it gets us
to a balanced budget with eight in eight
to ten years bob at the military let's
just come back to the military though
that's what i'm trying to put answered
the first question look governor
romney's called for five trillion
dollars of tax cuts that he says he's
gonna pay for by closing deductions now
the math doesn't work but he continues
to claim that he's going to do it he
then wants to spend another two trillion
dollars on military spending that our
military's not
asking for now keep in mind that mil our
military spending has gone up every
single year that i've been in office we
spend more on our military than the next
ten countries combined china russia
france the united kingdom you name it
next ten and what i did was work with
our joint chiefs of staff to think about
what are we gonna need in the future to
make sure that we are safe and that's
the budget that we've put forward but
what you can't do is spend two trillion
dollars in additional military spending
that the military is not asking for five
trillion dollars on tax cuts you say
that you're gonna pay for it by closing
loopholes and deductions without naming
what those loopholes and deductions are
and then somehow you're also going to
deal with the deficit that we've already
got the math simply doesn't work but
when it comes to our military what we
have to think about is not you know just
budgets we've got to think about
capabilities we need to be thinking
about cyber security we need to be
thinking about space that's exactly what
our budget does but it's driven by
strategy it's not driven by politics
it's not driven by members of congress
and what they would like to see it's
driven by what are we going to need to
keep the american people safe that's
exactly what our budget does and it also
then allows us to reduce our deficit
which is a significant national security
concern because we've got to make sure
that our economy is strong at home so
that we can project military power
overseas bob i'm pleased that i balanced
budgets i was in the world of business
for 25 years he didn't balance your
budget you wanted a business i went to
the olympics that was out of balance and
we got it on balance and made a success
there i had the chance to be governor
state four years in a row
democrats and republicans came together
to balance the budget we cut taxes 19
times balanced our budget the president
hasn't balanced a budget yet i expect to
have the opportunity to do so myself or
i'm going to be able to balance the
budget let's talk about military
spending and that's this our navy second
our navy is old excuse me our need
is smaller now that anytime since 1917
the navy said they needed 313 ships to
kyrat their mission we're not at a 285
we're headed down to the to the low 200s
if we go through a sequestration that's
unacceptable to me i want to make sure
that we have the ships that are required
by our navy our air force is older and
smaller that anytime since it was
founded in 1947
we've changed for the first time since
fdr we all since fdr we had the we've
always had the strategy was saying we
could fight in two conflicts at once now
we're changing to one conflict look that
this in my view is the highest
responsibility of the president of the
united states which is to maintain the
safety of the american people and i will
not cut our military budget by a
trillion dollars which is the
combination of the budget cuts that the
president has as well as the
sequestration cuts that in my view is
becca is making our future less certain
and less secure obviously the comments
on this first of all the sequester is
not something that i proposed it's
something that congress has proposed it
will not happen the budget that we're
talking about is not reducing our
military spending it's maintaining it
but i think governor romney maybe hasn't
spent enough time looking at how our
military works you mentioned the navy
for example and then we have fewer ships
than we did in 1916 well governor we
also have fewer horses and bayonets
because the nature of our military's
changed we have these things called
aircraft carriers where planes land on
them we have these ships that go
underwater nuclear submarines and so the
question is not a game of battleship
where we're counting ships it's it's
what our capabilities and so when i sit
down with the secretary of the navy and
the joint chiefs of staff we determine
how are we going to be best able to meet
all of our defense needs in a way that
also keeps faith with our troops that
also make sure that our veterans have
the kind of support that they need when
they come home and that is not reflected
in the kind of budget that you're
putting forward because it just doesn't
work alright and we visited the website
quite a bit and it still doesn't work a
lot to cover i'd like i'd like to move
to the next segment redlines israel and
would either of you and you'll have two
minutes and president obama you have the
first go at this one would either of you
be willing to declare that an attack on
israel is an attack on the united states
which of course is the same promise that
we give to our closest allies like japan
and if you made such a declaration would
not that deter iran it's certainly
deterred the soviet union for a long
long time when we made that when made we
made that promise to our allies mr
president first of all israel is a true
friend it is our greatest ally in the
region and if israel is attacked america
will stand with israel i've made that
clear throughout my presidency so you're
saying you've already made that
declaration i will stand with israel if
they are attacked and this is the reason
why working with israel we have created
the strongest military and intelligence
cooperation between our two countries in
history in fact this week we'll be
carrying out the largest military
exercise with israel in history this
very week but to the issue of iran now
as long as i'm president united states
iran will not get a nuclear weapon i've
made that clear when i came into office
we then organized the strongest
coalition and the strongest sanctions
against iran in history and it is
crippling their economy their currency
has dropped 80 percent their oil
production has plunged to the lowest
level since they were fighting a war
with a rocket 20 years ago so their
economy is in a shambles and the reason
we did this is because a nuclear iran is
a threat to our national security and
it's a threat to israel's national
security we cannot afford to have a
nuclear arms race in the most volatile
region of the world
iran's a state sponsor of terrorism and
for them to be able to provide nuclear
technology to non-state actors that's
unacceptable and they have said they
want to see israel wiped off the map
so the work that we've done with respect
to sanctions now
offers around a choice they can take the
diplomatic route and end their nuclear
program or they will have to face a
united world and a united states
president me who said we're not going to
take any options off the table
the disagreement i have with governor
romney is that during the course of this
campaign he's often talked as if we
should take premature military action i
think that would be a mistake because
when i've sent young men and women into
harm's way i always understand that that
is the last resort not the first resort
two minutes
well first of all i want to underscore
the the same point the president made
which is that if i'm president estates
when i'm president nighted states we
will stand with israel and and if israel
is attacked we have their back not just
diplomatically just culturally but
militarily that's number one number two
with regards to to iran and the threat
of iran there's no question but the
nuclear iran and nuclear-capable iran is
unacceptable to america it presents a
threat not only to our friends but
ultimately a threat to us to have iran
have nuclear material nuclear weapons
that could be used against a sort they
used to be threatening to us it's also
essential for us to understand what our
mission is in iran and that is to
dissuade iran from having a nuclear
weapon through peaceful and diplomatic
means and crippling sanctions or
something i called for five years ago
when i was in israel speaking at the
personally a conference they laid out
seven steps crippling sanctions were
number one and they do work you're
seeing it right now in the economy it's
absolutely the right thing to do to have
crippling sanctions i'd have put them in
place earlier but it's good that we have
them number two something i would add
today is i would tighten those sanctions
i would say that ships that carry
iranian oil can't come into our ports
i imagine the eu would agree with us as
well not only ships couldn't i'd say
companies that are moving their oil
can't people who are trading in their
oil can't i would tighten those
sanctions further secondly i'd take on
diplomatic isolation efforts i'd make
sure that ahmed akkad
is indicted under the genocide
convention his words amount to genocide
in citation i would indict him for it i
would also make sure that their
diplomats are treated like the pariah
around the world the same way we treated
the apartheid diplomats of south africa
we need to increase pressure time and
time again on iran because anything
other than a a solution to this which
says which stops this this nuclear folly
of theirs is unacceptable to america and
of course a military action is the last
resort it is something one would only
only consider if all of the other
avenues had been tried to their full
extent let me ask both you there as you
know there are reports that iran and the
united states as part of an
international group have agreed in
principle to talks about iran's nuclear
program what is the deal if there are
such talks
what is the deal that you would accept
mr president well first of all those
are reports in the newspaper they are
not true but our goal is to get iran to
recognize it needs to give up its
nuclear program and abide by the un
resolutions that have been in place
because they have the opportunity to
re-enter the community of nations and we
would welcome that there there are
people in iran who have the same
aspirations as people all around the
world for a better life and we hope that
their leadership takes the right
decision but the deal will accept is
they in their nuclear program it's very
straightforward and i'm glad that
governor romney agrees with the steps
that we're taking i
there have been times governor frankly
during the course of this campaign where
it sounded like you thought that you'd
do the same things we did but you'd same
louder and somehow that would make a
difference and it turns out that the
work involved in setting up these
crippling sanctions is painstaking it's
meticulous we started from the day we
got in the office and the reason it was
so important and this is a testament to
how we've restored american credibility
and strength around the world is we had
to make sure that all the countries
participated even countries like russia
and china because if it's just us that
are imposing sanctions we've had
sanctions in place for
long time it's because we got everybody
to agree that iran is seeing so much
pressure and we've got to maintain that
pressure there is a deal to be had and
that is that they abide by the rules
that have already been established they
convince the international community
they are not pursuing a nuclear program
there are inspections that are very
intrusive but over time what they can do
is regain credibility in the meantime
though we're not going to let up the
pressure until we have clear evidence
that takes place and one last thing i'm
just just to make this point the clock
is ticking we're not going to allow iran
to perpetually engage in negotiations
that lead nowhere and i've been very
clear to them you know because of the
intelligence coordination that we do
with a range of countries including
israel we have a sense of when they
would get breakout capacity which means
that we would not be able to intervene
in time to stop their nuclear program
and that clock is ticking and we're
going to make sure that if they do not
meet the demands of the international
community then we are going to take all
options necessary to make sure they
don't have a nuclear governor i think
from the very beginning one of the
challenges we've had with iran is that
they have looked at this administration
and felt that the administration was not
as strong as they needed to be i think
they saw weakness where they had
expected to find american strength and i
say that because from the very beginning
the president has campaigned some for
years ago said he'd meet with all the
world's worst actors in his first year
he'd sit down with chavez and and kim
jong-il with a castro and with with
president ahmadinejad of iran and and i
think they looked and thought well
that's an unusual honor to receive from
the president of the united states and
then the president began what i'm called
an apology tour of going to various
nations in the middle east and and
criticizing america i think they look at
that and saw a weakness then when there
were dissidents in the streets of tehran
a green revolution holding signs saying
is america with us the president was
silent i think they noticed that as well
and i think that when the president said
he was going to create daylight between
in israel that that they noticed that as
well all of these things suggested i
think to the iranian mullahs that hey
you know we can keep on pushing along
here we can keep talks going on but
we're just going to keep on spinning
centrifuges now they're some 10,000
centrifuges spinning uranium preparing
to create a nuclear a threat to the
united states into the world that's
unacceptable for us and it's essential
for a president to show strength from
the very beginning to make it very clear
what is acceptable and not acceptable
and an iranian nuclear program is not
acceptable to us they must not develop
nuclear capability and the way to make
sure they understand that is by having
from the very beginning the tightest
sanctions possible they need to be
tightened our diplomatic isolation needs
to be tougher when you do and i document
data jawed we need to put the pressure
on them as hard as we possibly can
because if we do that we won't have to
take the military action bob let me just
respond nothing governor romney just
said it's true starting with this notion
of me apologizing this has been probably
the biggest whopper that's been told
during the course of this campaign and
every fact checker and every reporter's
looked at it governor has said this is
not true and when it comes to tightening
sanctions look as i said before we've
put in the toughest most crippling
sanctions ever and the fact is while we
were coordinating an international
coalition to make sure these sanctions
were effective you were still invested
in a chinese state oil company that was
doing business with the iranian oil
sector so i'll let the american people
decide judge who's going to be more
effective and more credible when it
comes to imposing crippling sanctions
and with respect to our attitude about
the iranian revolution i was very clear
about the murderous activities that had
taken place and that was contrary to
international law and everything that
civilized people stand for and and so
the strength that we have shown in iran
is shown by the fact that we've been
able to mobilize the world when i came
into office
world was divided iran was resurgent
iran is at its weakest point
economically strategically militarily
vincennes than in many years and we are
going to continue to keep the pressure
on to make sure that they do not get a
nuclear weapon that's in america's
national interest and that will be the
case so long as i'm president were four
years closer to a nuclear iran we're
four years closer to nuclear iran and
and we should not have wasted these four
years to the extent they've they've
continued to be able to spin these
centrifuges and get that much closer
that's number one number two mr
president the reason i call it an
apology to her it's because you went to
the middle east and you flew to egypt
and saudi arabia and to turkey in iraq
and by the way you skipped israel our
closest friend in the region but you
went to the other nations and by the way
they noticed that you skipped israel and
then in those nations and an arabic tv
you said that america had been
dismissive and derisive you said that on
occasion america had dictated to other
nations mr president america has not
dictated to other nations we have freed
other nations from dictate
let me let me respond you know if we're
going to talk about trips that we've
taken when i was a candidate for office
first trip i took was to visit our
troops and when i went to israel as a
candidate i didn't take donors i didn't
attend fundraisers i went to yad vashem
the holocaust museum there to remind
myself that the nature of evil and why
our bond with israel will be unbreakable
and then i went down to the border towns
of stroke which had experienced missiles
raining down from hamas and i saw
families there who showed me where
missiles had come down near their
children's bedrooms and i was reminded
of what that would mean if those were my
kids which is why as president we funded
an iron dome program to stop those
missiles so that's how i've used my
when i travel to israel and when i
travel to the region and the central
question at this point is going to be
who is going to be credible to all
parties involved and they can look at my
track record whether it's iran sanctions
whether it's dealing with
counterterrorism whether it's supporting
democracy whether it's supporting
women's rights whether it's supporting
religious minorities and they can say
that the president united states and the
united states of america has stood on
the right side of history and and and
that kind of credibility is precisely
why we've been able to show leadership
on a wide range of issues facing the
world right now what if what if the
prime minister of israel called you on
the phone and said our bombers are on
the way we're going to bomb iran what do
you baba is it let's not go into
hypotheticals of that nature our
relationship with israel my relationship
with the prime minister of israel is
such that we would not get a call saying
our bombers around the way or their
fighters are on the way this is the kind
of thing that would have been discussed
and and thoroughly evaluated well before
that kind of so that's what let's go
back to what the president was speaking
about which is what's happening in the
world and and and and the the president
statement that things are going so well
look i look at what's happening around
the world and i see iran for years
closer to a bomb
i see the middle east with a rising tide
of violence chaos tomorrow
i see jihadists continuing to spread
whether they're rising or just about the
same level hard hard to precisely
measure but this is clear they're there
they're very very strong i see syria
with 30,000 civilians dead assad still
in power
i see our trade deficit with china
larger than it's growing larger every
year as a matter of fact i look around
the world and i i don't feel that that
you see north korea continuing to export
their nuclear techni
ecology russia said they're not going to
follow nunn-lugar anymore they're back
away from nuclear proliferation treaty
that we had with them i look around the
world i don't see our influence growing
around the world i see our influence
receding in part because of the failure
of the president to deal with our
economic challenges at home in part
because of our withdrawal from our
commitment to our military the way i
think it ought to be in part because of
the the the turmoil with israel i mean
the president received the letter from
38 democrat senators saying the tensions
with israel were a real problem they
asked him please repair the tension
democrat senators please repair the
darkness in his own the party governor
the problem is is that on a whole range
of issues whether it's the middle east
whether it's afghanistan whether it's
iraq whether it's now iran you've been
all over the map i mean i'm i'm pleased
that you now are endorsing our policy
applying diplomatic pressure and
potentially having bilateral discussions
with the iranians to end their nuclear
program but just a few years ago you
said that's something you'd never do in
the same way that you initially opposed
a timetable in afghanistan now you're
fort although it depends in the same way
that you say you would have ended the
war in iraq but recently gave a speech
saying that we should have 20,000 more
folks in there the same way that you
said that it was mission creep to go
after gadhafi when it comes to going
after osama bin laden you said well any
president would make that call but when
you were a candidate in 2008 as i was
and i said if i got bin laden in our
sights i would take that shot you said
we shouldn't move heaven and earth to
get one man and you said we should ask
pakistan for permission and if we had
asked pakistan permission we would not
have got enough and it was worth moving
heaven and earth together
you know after we killed bin laden i was
at ground zero for a memorial and talked
to a young woman who was four years old
when 9/11 happened and the last
conversation she had with her father was
him calling from the twin towers saying
payton i love you and i will always
watch over you and for the next decade
she was haunted by that conversation and
she said to me you know by finally
getting bin laden that brought some
closure to me and when we do things like
that when we bring those who have harmed
us to justice that sends a message to
the world and it tells payton that we
did not forget her father and and i make
that point because that's the kind of
clarity of leadership and those
decisions are not always popular those
decisions generally generally are not
and even some in my own party including
my current vice president had the same
critique as you did but what the
american people understand is is that i
look at what we need to get done to keep
the american people safe and to move our
interests forward and i make those to
say all right let's go and that leads
assist takes us right to the next
segment governor america's longest war
afghanistan and pakistan governor you
get to go you can't go here but you
can't have the the president just lay
out a whole series that give you a
chance with our specs or you had laid
out quite a program well that's probably
true well give you well agree we'll
catch up the united states is scheduled
to turn over responsibility for security
in afghanistan to the afghan government
in 2014 at that point we will withdraw
combat troops leave a smaller force of
americans if i understand our policy in
afghanistan for training purposes it
seems to me the key question here is
what do you do if the deadline arrives
and it is obvious the afghans are unable
to handle their security do we still
leave and i believe
governor romney you go first well we're
gonna be finished by 2014 and when i'm
president we'll make sure we bring our
troops out by the end of 2014 the
commanders and the generals there are on
track to do so we've seen progress over
the past several years the surge has
been successful and the training program
is proceeding apace there are now a
large number of afghan security forces
350,000 that are ready to step in to
provide security and and we're going to
be able to make that transition by the
end of 2014 so our troops will come home
at that point i can't tell you at the
same time that that we will make sure
that we look at what's happening in
pakistan and recognize that what's
happening in pakistan is going to have a
major impact on the success in
afghanistan and i say that because i
know a lot of people just feel like we
should just brush our hands and walk
away and i don't mean you mr president
but some people in the in our nation
feel that the pakistan isn't being nice
to us and that we should just walk away
from them but pakistan is important to
the region to the world and to us
because pakistan has 100 nuclear
warheads and they're russian to build a
lot more they'll have more than great
britain sometime in the in the
relatively near future they also have
the haqqani network and and the taliban
existent within their country and so a
pakistan that falls apart becomes a
failed state would be of extraordinary
danger to afghanistan and to us and so
we're gonna have to remain helpful in
encouraging pakistan to move towards a a
more stable government and and rebuild a
relationship with us and that means that
that that our aid that we provide to
pakistan is gonna have to be conditioned
upon certain benchmarks being met so for
me i look at this as both a need to help
move pakistan in the right direction and
also to get afghanistan to to be ready
and they will be ready by the end of
2004 surprised when i came into office
we were still bogged down in in iraq and
afghanistan had been drifting for a
decade we ended the war in iraq
refocused our attention on afghanistan
and we did deliver a surge a
troops that was facilitated in part
because we had ended the war in iraq and
we are now in a position where we have
met many of the objectives that got us
there in the first place
part of what had happened is we've
forgotten why we had gone we went
because there were people who were
responsible for 3,000 american deaths
and so we decimated al-qaida's core
leadership in the border regions between
afghanistan and pakistan we then started
to build up afghan forces and we're now
in a position where we can transition
out because there's no reason why
americans should die when afghans are
perfectly capable of defending their own
now that transitions has to take place
in a responsible fashion we've been
there a long time and we've got to make
sure that we and our coalition partners
are pulling out responsibly and giving
afghans of capabilities that they need
but what i think the american people
recognize is after a decade of war it's
time to do some nation-building here at
home and what we can now do is free up
some resources to for example put
americans back to work
especially our veterans rebuilding our
roads our bridges our schools making
sure that you know our veterans are
getting the care that they need when it
comes to post-traumatic stress disorder
and traumatic brain injury making sure
that the certifications that they need
for good jobs of the future are in place
you know i was having lunch with some a
veteran minnesota who had been a medic
dealing with the most extreme
circumstances when he came home and he
wanted to become a nurse he had to start
from scratch and what we've said is
let's change those certifications the
first lady's done great work with an
organization called joining forces
putting our veterans back to work and as
a consequence veterans unemployment is
actually now lower than general
population it was higher when i came
into office so those are the kinds of
things that we can now do because we're
making that transition in afghanistan
all right let me go to
of romney because you talked about a
pakistan and what needs to be done there
general allen our commander in
afghanistan says that americans continue
to die at the hands of groups who are
supported by pakistan we know that
pakistan has arrested the doctor who
helped us catch obama's bin laden it
still provides safe haven for terrorists
yet we continue to give pakistan
billions of dollars is it time for us to
divorce pakistan no it's not time to
divorce a nation on earth that has a
hundred nuclear weapons and is on the
way to double that at some point a
nation that has serious threats from
terrorist groups within its nation as i
indicated before the taliban haqqani
network it's a nation that's not like
like others that does not have a
civilian leadership that is calling the
shots there you've got the isi their
intelligence organization is probably
the most powerful of the three branches
there then you have the military and
then you have the civilian government
this is a a nation which if it falls
apart if it becomes a failed state there
are nuclear weapons there and you've got
you've got terrorists there who could
grab their their hands none of those
nuclear weapons this is this is an
important part of the world force a
pakistan is a technically an ally and
they're not acting very much like an
ally right now but we have some work to
do and i i don't blame the
administration for the fact that the
relationship with with pakistan is
strained we had to go into pakistan we
had to go in there to get osama bin
laden that was the right thing to do and
and that upset them but there was
obviously a great deal of anger even
before that but we're gonna have to work
with the with the the people and
pakistan to try and help them move to a
more responsible a course than the one
that they're on it's important for them
it's important for the nuclear weapons
it's important for the success of
afghanistan because inside pakistan you
have a large group of passions that are
that are taliban they're gonna come
rushing back in to afghanistan when we
go and that's one of the reasons the
afghan security forces have so much
work to do to be able to fight against
that but but it's important for us to
recognize that we can't just walk away
from pakistan but we do need to make
sure that as we as we send support for
them that this is tied to them making
progress on on matters that would lead
them to becoming a civil society let me
ask you a governor because we know
president obama's position on this what
is what is your position on the use of
drones well i believe that we should use
any and all means necessary to take out
people who pose a threat to us and our
friends around the world and it's widely
reported that drones are being used in
drone strikes and i support that
entirely and feel the president was
right to up the usage of that technology
and believe that we should continue to
use it to continue to go after the
people who represent a threat to this
nation and to our friends let me also
note that as i said earlier we're gonna
have to do more than just going after
leaders and killing bad guys important
as that is we're also gonna have to have
a far more effective and comprehensive
strategy to help move the world away
from terror and islamic extremism we
haven't done that yet we talk a lot
about these things but you look at the
the record you look at the record of the
last four years and say is it ron closer
to a bomb yes is the middle east in
tumult yes it is al qaeda on the run on
its heels no it is are israel and the
palestinians closer to reaching a peace
agreement no they haven't had talks in
two years we have not seen the progress
we need to have and i'm convinced that
with strong leadership and an effort to
build a strategy based upon helping
these nations for eject extremism we can
see the kind of peace and prosperity the
world demands well keep in mind our
strategy wasn't just going after bin
laden that we've created partnerships
throughout the region to deal with
extremism in somalia in yemen in
pakistan and what we've also done is
engage these governments in the kind of
reforms that are actually going to make
a difference in people's lives day to
day to make sure that their governments
aren't corrupt to make sure that they
are treating women
with the kind of respect and dignity
that every nation that succeeds has
shown and to make sure that they've got
a free-market system that works so
across the board we are engaging them in
building capacity in these countries and
we have stood on the side of democracy
one thing i think americans should be
proud of when tunisians began to protest
this nation me my administration stood
with them earlier than just about any
other country in egypt we stood on the
side of democracy in libya we stood on
the side of the people and as a
consequence there is no doubt that
attitudes about americans have changed
but they're always going to be elements
in these countries that potentially
threaten the united states and we want
to shrink those groups and those
networks and we can do that but we're
always also gonna have to maintain
vigilance when it comes to terrorist
activities the truth though is that al
qaeda is much weaker than it was when i
came into office and they don't have the
same capacities to attack the us
homeland and our allies as they did four
years ago let's let's go to the next
segment because it's a very important
one it is the rise of china and future
challenges for america i want to just
begin this by asking both of you and i
said you you go first this time
what do you believe is the greatest
future threat to the national security
of this country well i think it will
continue to be terrorists and networks
we have to remain vigilant as i just
said but with respect to china china's
both an adversary but also a potential
partner in the international community
if it's following the rules so my
attitude coming into office was that we
are going to insist that china plays by
the same rules as everybody else and i
know americans had seen
jobs being shipped overseas businesses
and workers not getting a level playing
field when it came to trade and that's
the reason why i set up a trade task
force to go after cheaters when it came
to international trade that's the reason
why we have brought more cases against
china for violating trade rules then the
other the previous administration had
done in two terms and we've won just
about every case that we filed that has
been decided in fact just recently steel
workers in ohio and throughout the
midwest pennsylvania are in a position
now to sell steel to china because we
won that case we had a tire case in
which they were flooding us with cheap
domestic tires or cheap chinese tires
and we put a stop to it and as a
consequence save jobs throughout america
i have to say that governor romney
criticized me for being too tough in
that tire case said this wouldn't be
good for american workers and that it
would be protectionist but i tell you
those workers don't feel that way they
feel as if they had finally an
administration who was going to take
this issue seriously over the long term
in order for us to compete with china
we've also got to make sure though that
we're taking business taking care of
business here at home if we don't have
the best education system in the world
if we don't continue to put money into
research and technology that will allow
us to create great businesses here in
the united states that's how we lose the
competition and unfortunately governor
romney's budget and his proposals would
not allow us to make those investments
okay governor well first of all it's not
a government that makes business
successful it's not government
investments that make businesses grow
and hire people let me also note that
the greatest threat that the world faces
the greatest national security threat is
a nuclear iran let's talk about china
china has an interest that's very much
like ours in one respect and that is
they want a stable world they don't want
war they don't want to see protectionism
they don't want to see the world break
out into into various forms of chaos
because they have to they have to
and goods and put people to work if they
have about 20,000 20 million other
people coming out of the farms every
year coming into the cities needing jobs
so they want the economy to work in the
world to be free and open and so we can
be a partner with china we don't have to
be an adversary in any way shape or form
we can work with them we can collaborate
with them if they're willing to be
responsible now they look at us and say
is it a good idea to be with america how
strong are we gonna be how strong is our
economy they look at the fact that we
alma trillion dollars and other people
16 trillion in total including them they
look at our our decision to to cut back
on our military capabilities a trillion
dollars the secretary of defense called
these trillion dollars of cuts to our
military devastating it's not my term
it's the president's own secretary of
defense called them devastating they
look at it at america's commitments
around the world and they see what's
happening and they say well okay as
america get gonna be strong and the
answer is yes if i'm president america
will be very strong we'll also make sure
that we have trade relations with china
that worked for us i've watched year in
and year out as companies have shut down
and people have lost their jobs because
china has not played by the same rules
in part by holding down artificially the
value of their currency it holds down
the prices of their goods
it means our goods aren't as competitive
and we lose jobs that's got to end
they're making some progress they need
to make more that's why i'm day one i
will label them a currency manipulator
which allows us to apply tariffs where
they're taking jobs they're stealing our
intellectual property our patents our
designs our technology hacking into our
computers counterfeiting our goods they
have to understand we want to trade with
them we want a world that's stable we
like free enterprise but you've got to
play by the rules well governor let me
just ask you if you declare them a
currency manipulator on day one some
people are saying you're just going to
start a trade war with china on day one
is that isn't there a risk that that
could happen
well they sell us about this much stuff
every year and we sell them about this
every year so it's pretty clear who
doesn't want to trade more and there's
one going on right now which we don't
know about it's a silent one and they're
winning we have enormous trade imbalance
with china and it's worse this year than
last year and it's worse last year than
the year before and so we have to
understand that we can't just surrender
and lose jobs year in and year out we
have to say to our friends in china look
you guys are playing aggressively we
understand it yeah but but this can't
keep on going you can't keep on holding
down the value of your currency stealing
our intellectual property counterfeiting
our products selling them around the
world even into the united states i was
with one company that makes a valve of
in process industries and they said look
we were we were having some valves
coming in that that were broken and we
had to repair them under warranty and we
looked them up and they had our serial
number on him and then we noticed that
there was more than one with that same
serial number there were counterfeit
products being made overseas with the
same serial number as a us company the
same packaging these were being sold
into our market and around the world as
if they were made by the us competitor
this can't go on i want a great
relationship with china china can be our
partner but but that doesn't mean they
can just roll all over us and steal our
jobs on an unfair basis
well governor romney is right you are
familiar with jobs being shipped
overseas because you invested in
companies that were shipping jobs
overseas and you know that's your right
i mean that's and you know that's your
right i mean that's how our free market
but i've made a different bet on
american workers oh if we had taken your
advice governor romney about our auto
industry we'd be buying cars from china
instead of selling cars to china if we
take your advice with respect to how we
change our tax code so that companies
that are profits overseas don't pay us
taxes compared to companies here that
are paying taxes now that's estimated to
create 800,000 jobs the problem is they
won't be here they'll be in places like
if we're not making investments in
education and basic research which is
not something the private sector is
doing at a sufficient paste right now it
has never done then we will lose the
lead in things like clean energy
technology now with respect to what
we've done with china already us exports
have doubled since i came into office to
china and actually currencies are at
their most advantageous point for us
exporters since 1993 we absolutely have
to make more progress and that's where
we're going to keep on pressing and when
it comes to our military and chinese
security part of the reason that we were
able to pivot to the asia-pacific region
after having ended the war and
transitioning out of afghanistan is
precisely because this is going to be a
massive growth area in the future and we
believe china can be a partner but we're
also sending a very clear signal that
america is a pacific power that we are
going to have a presence there we are
working with countries in the region to
make sure for example that ships can
pass through that commerce continues and
we're organizing trade relations with
countries other than china so that china
starts feeling more pressure about
meeting basic international standards
that's the kind of leadership we've
shown in the region that's the kind of
leadership that will continue to show i
just want to take one of those points
again attacking me is not talking about
an agenda for for getting more trade and
opening up more jobs in this country but
the president mentioned the auto
industry and that somehow i would be in
favor of jobs being elsewhere nothing
could be further from the truth i'm a
son of detroit i was born in in detroit
my dad was head of a car company i like
american cars and i would do nothing to
hurt the us auto industry my plan to get
the industry on its feet when it was in
trouble was not to start writing checks
it was president bush that wrote the
first checks i disagree with that i said
they need these companies need to go
through a management bankruptcy and in
that process they can get government
help and government guarantees but they
need to go through bankruptcy to get rid
of excess cost and the debt burden that
they'd they'd built up and what you said
fortunately people take a look if you
take a look at romney you did not look
at the i did not say no i'm you want to
find a governor help i said that we
would provide guarantees and and that
was what was a lot able to allow these
companies to go through bankruptcy to
come out of bankruptcy under no
circumstances would i do anything other
than to help this industry get on its
feet and the idea that has been
suggested that i would liquidate
industry of course not of course not
let's check the height of silliness look
let's never set up with the record i
would liquidate the industry honor i
want a cable industry loan for diving
and and that's why i have the kind of
commitment to make sure that our
industries in this country can compete
and be successful we in this country can
compete successfully with anyone in the
world and we're going to we're gonna
have to have a president whoever that
doesn't think that somehow the
government investing in car companies
like tesla and fisker making electric
battery cars this is not research mr
president these are the government
investing in companies investing in
solyndra this is the company this
doesn't basic research i i want to
invest in research research is great
universities and think tanks great but
investing in companies absolutely not
that's the wrong way to go that's the
master speaking so i want to make sure
that we make we make america more
competitive that we do those things that
make america that attractive place in
the world for entrepreneurs innovators
businesses to grow but you're investing
in companies doesn't do that in fact it
makes it less likely for them to come
here because the private sector is not
good interests in it okay it's solar car
but i'm happy to reapply if if you're
inviting someone else the look i think
anybody out there can check the record
governor romney you keep on trying to
airbrush history you were very clear
that you would not provide government
assistance to the us auto companies even
if they went through bankruptcy you said
that they could get it in the private
marketplace that wasn't true they would
have gone through a lick with your i
know i'm i am not looking at you're
right people will look it up but more
importantly it is true that in order for
us to be competitive we're gonna have to
make some smart choices right now
cutting our education budget that's not
a smart choice that will not help us
compete with china cutting our
investments in research and technology
that's not a smart choice that will not
help us compete with china bringing down
our deficit by adding seven trillion
dollars of tax cuts and military
spending that our military is not asking
for before we even get to the debt that
we currently have that is not going to
make us more competitive those are the
kinds of choices that the american
people face right now having a tax code
that rewards companies that are shipping
overseas instead of companies that are
investing here in the united states that
will not make because it's more
competitive and and the one thing that
i'm absolutely clear about is that after
a decade in which we saw drift jobs
being shipped overseas
nobody championing american workers
american businesses we've now begun to
make some real progress what we can't do
is go back to the same policies that got
us into such difficulty in the first
place that's why we have to move forward
now go back i couldn't
i agree more about going forward but i
certainly want to go back to the
policies of the last four years the
policy the last four years has seen
incomes in america decline every year
for middle-income families now down
$4,300 during a burn
23 million americans still struggling to
find a good job when you came to office
32 many people on food stamps to pay for
47 million people on food stamps when
you came to office just over 10 trillion
dollars in debt now 16 trillion dollars
in debt it hasn't worked
you said i now we'd be at 5.4 percent
we're 9 million jobs short of that i've
met some of those two people i've met in
appleton wisconsin
i met a young woman and in philadelphia
who's coming
not a car
can't find work i bet anne was with
someone just the other day that were
just weeping about not being able to get
work it's just a tragedy in a nation so
prosperous as ours that the last four
years have been so hard and that and
that's why it's so critical do we make
america once again the most subtractive
place in the world to start businesses
to build jobs to grow the economy and
that's not gonna happen by by just
telling teachers look okay i love i love
i'm happy to have states and communities
that want to hire teachers do that by
the way i don't like to have the federal
government start pushing this way deeper
and deeper into our schools let the
to the governor
didn't hire our teachers governor but i
love teachers but i want to get our
private sector growing i know how to do
it i think we all love teachers
gentlemen thank you so much for for a
very vigorous debate we've come to the
end it is time for closing statements
first mr preston thank you
on it and tulane university you've not
heard three debates months of
campaigning and way too many tv
commercials and now you've got a choice
over the last four years we've made real
progress digging our way out of policies
that gave us to prolonged wars record
deficits and the worst economic crisis
since the great depression governor
romney wants to take us back to those
policies foreign policy that's wrong and
reckless economic policies that won't
create jobs
to make sure the folks of the barracks i
don't have to play by the same rules
that you do
for america i want to be
our stress i put forward a plan and make
sure the manufacturing jobs back to our
source by rewarding confidence and small
business isn't here not overseas i want
to make sure we've got the best
education system in the world we're
retaining our workers for the jobs of
own energy by developing oil net
gasps but also the energy sources of the
future yes i want to reduce our deficit
by cutting spending the we don't need
but also by asking the wealthy to do a
little bit more so that we can invest
and things like research and technology
that are the key to a 21st century
economy as commander-in-chief i will
maintain the strong mr military in the
world keep faith with our troops and go
after those who would do us harm but
after a decade of war i think all right
we got to do some nation-building here
at home rebuilding our roads our bridges
and especially caring for our veterans
who sacrifice so much for free and we've
been through tough times but we always
bounce back because of our character
because we pulled together and if i have
the privilege of being your president
for another four years i promise you i
your voices i will fight for your
families and i will work every single
day to make sure that america continues
to be the greatest nation on earth
thank you governor
thank you bob mr president folks to
lynn university good to be with you i'm
optimistic about the future i'm excited
about our prospects i want to see peace
i want to see
that's our objective we have an
opportunity to have real leadership
americas can have that kind of
leadership and continue to promote
principles of peace they'll make a world
a safer place and make people in this
country more confident that their future
is secure i also want to make sure that
we get this economy going and there are
two very different paths as the country
can take one is the path represented by
the president which at the end of four
years i mean we'd have 20 trillion
dollars in debt heading towards i'll get
us on track to a balanced budget
the president's path will mean
continuing decline and take-home pay i
want to make sure if econ paid turns
around stressed to grow the president's
path means 20 million people out of work
struggling for a good job i'll get
people back to work with 12 million new
jobs i make sure i cut in the
remember like getting them good jobs
america's gonna come back and for that
to happen we're gonna have to have a
person who can work across the aisle i
was in a state where my legislature was
87 percent democrat i learned how to get
along on the other side of the aisle
we've got to do that in washington
washington is broken i know what it
takes to get this country back and we'll
work with good democrats and good
republicans to do that this nation is
the hole for the earth blast
having a nation that's free and
prosperous thanks to the contributions
of the greatest generation they've held
a torch for the world to see the torch
to freedom and hope and opportunity now
it's our turn to take that torch i'm
convinced we'll do it we need strong
leadership i'd like to be that leader
with your support i'll work with you
i'll lead you in an open and honest way
and i ask for your vote i'd like to be
the next president at its peak to
support this great nation and to make
sure that we all together maintain
america as the hope of the earth thank
you so much gentlemen
thank you both so much that brings an
end to this year's debates and we want
to thank lynn university and its
students for having us as i always do at
the end of these debates i leave you
with the words of my mom who said go
vote you feel big and strong that's good